Remaineder of Trees and Rules chapter (#114)
aml4td/website: chapters/cls-trees.qmd

\end{align}
$$

> A limitation of information gain is its bias toward predictors with many possible values, particularly categorical predictors with numerous categories. To address this issue, @quinlan1986induction introduced the gain ratio in the C4.5 algorithm^[Quinlan's original classification tree model is called C4.5, while C5.0 is the latest version. The models are very similar, and until @sec-cls-c50 we will refer to the model as C4.5 (and then C5.0 from that point onward).]. The gain ratio is calculated by dividing the information gain by the intrinsic information of the split, which measures the potential information generated by dividing the samples according to the predictor:

Author: I changed most of the references to C5.0 back to C5.0 until we get to that section. Hopfully this note will reduce confusion.

Reviewer: Got it.

To illustrate the binning approach, consider the partitioning model illustrated in @fig-split-adjacent-tree.  The figure illustrates a tree of a maximum depth of 3 splits.  The first split uses the Gini index criterion to split the maximum vapor predictor at 1,248.  Samples with values greater than or equal to 1,248 are illustrated on the right side of the tree.  The next split on this side of the tree is the county variable.  The adjacent category methodology creates a split with 7 counties in one group and the remaining counties in the other group.  @fig-split-county demonstrates why the counties were partitioned into these groups.  The x-axis in (a) and (b) of this figure provides the counties ordered from the lowest proportion of forested counties (left) to the highest proportion (right).  The top portion of the figure provides the Gini index for the partitioning of the samples at that county and all counties to the left.  The purity is optimized between the counties of Asotin and Okanogan.  At this split point, 7 counties are placed into one group, and 13 counties are in the other group, as illustrated in @fig-split-adjacent-tree.

> TODO: what is @fig-split-county referring to?

Author: @kjell-stattenacity This seemed to stand out in the paragraph above. It might be a merge issue but I wanted you to take another look at this section.

Reviewer: Yes, this is a merge issue.

The C4.5 approach with fractional samples is more probabilistic and can better represent the uncertainty introduced by missing values. By allowing samples to contribute to multiple nodes, it leverages all available information in the tree. This approach can be particularly effective when missingness is informative or when there are complex patterns of missingness in the data. However, fractional accounting can make the model more difficult to interpret and the prediction process more complex.

Both approaches have been shown to perform well in practice, and the choice between them often depends on the specific requirements of the application, such as the need for interpretability, the patterns of missingness in the data, and the computational resources available.

> ### Handling Missing Values in Rule-Based Models {#sec-missing-rules}

Author: I moved this to the rule section below

Trees grown to maximum depth typically overfit the training data, capturing noise rather than underlying predictive patterns. _Pruning_, the process of removing leaves in a tree, addresses this issue by simplifying an overgrown tree, removing branches that do not contribute significantly to the model's predictive performance. Pruning is a critical step in tree construction, as it helps balance the trade-off between model complexity and predictive performance.

Unpruned classification trees often exhibit excellent performance on the training data but poor performance on new, unseen data. This discrepancy occurs because the tree has learned not only the underlying patterns in the data but also the random noise present in the training samples. By fitting the noise, the tree becomes overly complex and fails to generalize well.

> This highlights an important characteristic of trees trained using greedy optimization: they are _unstable_. This means that if the training data are perturbed (e.g., resampled or individual values slightly changed), the tree structure might be completely different^[This is especially likely if there are correlated predictors in the training set.]. If a particular split variable or value is different, it is highly likely that all subsequent splits would also be different. This, in the context of the variables-bias discussion in @sec-variance-bias, means that trees have high model variance (but low bias). This is a significant disadvantage for trees, but, as we'll see in the next chapter, it makes them ideal for creating ensemble models. 

Author: moved to the instability section

In these equations, $\widehat{\mathcal{F}}_{ik}$ plays a part similar to a linear predictor and can range across the entire real line. The relationship between that value and the probability $\widehat{p}_{ik}$ is a _logistic_ link. We'll see more of this format in the next chapter. 

There is also the possibility of including an additional model inside each terminal node. For example, we could embed a logistic or multinomial regression model within each terminal node, trained on the data captured by the rule that leads to that node. One of the earliest proposals of this kind was for regression "model trees" described by @quinlan1992learning. This specific model will be described in @sec-reg-cubist. For classification models, there are similar models: @loh2002regression, @landwehr2005logistic, @chan2004lotus, @gama2004functional, and @zeileis2008model. 

## Specific Tree-Based Models {#sec-cls-tree-models}

### CART {#sec-cls-cart}
CART, short for Classification And Regression Trees, is the most popular approach for creating individual trees [@breiman1984classification]. These trees are restricted to binary splits and use the following tactics discussed above: 

> - Recursive greedy searches that typically optimize the Gini statistic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Performing recursive greedy searches that typically optimize the Gini statistic.
```

- Grouping two sets of categories when splitting qualitative predictors. 

> - Reduced tree complexity via cost-complexity pruning. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Reducing tree complexity via cost-complexity pruning. 
```

> - Surrogate splits account for missing predictor data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Accounting for missing predictor data through surrogate splits. 
```

> - Basic estimates of proportions in the terminal nodes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Estimating proportions in the terminal nodes. 
```

The primary tuning parameters are: 

- The cost-complexity parameter $C_p$. Values tend to range between 0.1 (usually a tree with a single split) and zero (no pruning). Grids for this parameter are often created with equal spacing on the log<sub>10</sub> scale. 

> - $n_{min}$ and the maximum tree depth to reduce the complexity of the tree in the growing phase. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- $n_{min}$ and the $maximum tree depth$ to reduce the complexity of the tree in the growing phase. 
```

> Despite multiple exhaustive searches, CART models are very efficient during training and can be created (and predicted) very quickly. Like all of the models described in this chapter, these models can be easily converted to highly efficient code, especially via SQL. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite multiple exhaustive searches, CART models are very efficient during training and and can generate predictions quickly. Like all models described in this chapter, CART can be easily converted to highly efficient code, especially via SQL. 
```

> They are _very_ low maintenance; they require almost no preprocessing, handle missing data, and have automatic feature selection. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These models require minimal maintenance; they require almost no data preprocessing, handle missing values seamlessly, and perform automatic feature selection. 
```

      terms = purrr::map_chr(rules, rlang::expr_deparse, width = 10^4),
      terms = strsplit(terms, split = "&"),
      num_terms = purrr::map_int(terms, length)
    ) |> 
    dplyr::summarize(
      `Mean Rule Size` = mean(num_terms),
      `# Terminal Nodes` = length(num_terms)
    ) |> 
    tidyr::pivot_longer(
      c(`Mean Rule Size`, `# Terminal Nodes`),
      names_to = ".metric",
      values_to = ".estimate"
    ) |> 
    dplyr::mutate(.estimator = "none")
  dplyr::bind_rows(preds, rules)
}

forest_c5_res <-
  c5_wflow |>
  tune_grid(
    resamples = forested_rs,
    grid = 25,
    control = control_grid(
      save_pred = TRUE,
      save_workflow = TRUE,
      extract = c5_extract,
      pkgs = "lorax"
    ),
    metrics = cls_mtr
  )

forest_c5_best <- select_best(forest_c5_res, metric = "brier_class")

forest_c5_pred <-
  forest_c5_res |>
  collect_predictions(parameters = forest_c5_best) |>
  mutate(wflow_id = "C5.0") |>
  relocate(wflow_id)

forest_c5_mtr_ex <-
  forest_c5_pred |>
  cls_mtr(class, estimate = .pred_class, .pred_Yes)
```

```{r}
#| label: forest-c5rules
#| include: false
#| cache: TRUE

c5rules_spec <- 
  decision_tree(min_n = tune()) |> 

>   set_engine("C5.0", CF = tune(), rules = TRUE) |> 

Author: There is a tuning-related bug in `rules::C5.0Rules()` so I changed to a decision tree with the `rules = TRUE` argument to get to the same place. 

I'll change it to the function in the rules package once the bug is fixed.

The numerically best tree used a cost-complexity value of 10<sup>`r round(log10(forest_cart_best$cost_complexity), 2)`</sup>, a depth of `r forest_cart_best$tree_depth`, and $n_{min}$ = `r forest_cart_best$min_n` training set samples. The model's resampled performance statistics are shown in @tbl-tree-statistics.

::: columns
::::: {.column width="10%"}
:::::

::::: {.column width="80%"}
::::::: {#tbl-tree-statistics}
```{r}
#| label: tree-statistics
#| echo: false
theme_set(theme_bw())
# fmt: skip
tree_bt_stats |>
  dplyr::select(
    Model, 
    Estimate_brier_class, Lower_brier_class, Upper_brier_class, data_brier_class, 
    Estimate_roc_auc, , Lower_roc_auc, Upper_roc_auc, data_roc_auc
  ) |>
  mutate(
    Model = factor(Model, c("CART", "C5.0", "Conditional Inference", "Oblique (Ridge)", "C5.0 Rules")) 
  ) |> 
  arrange(Model) |> 
  gt() |> 

>   gt_plt_dist(

Author: These distributions in rows seem kinda neat to me. Interested in your thoughts.

Reviewer: This is a very effective visual comparison.  Like it!  While there are numerical differences between CART and C.50 Rules, there may not be much of a practical predictive difference (~0.01 improvement in Briar score; 0.03 improvement in ROC AUC).  Still, the layout conveys a lot of information that can be easily compared.

```{r}
#| label: fig-forest-cart-diag
#| echo: false
#| out-width: 70%
#| fig-width: 6
#| fig-height: 6
#| fig-cap: "Aspects of the final CART model: (a) calibration assessment, (b) the ROC curve, and (c) variable importance scores. The first two plots are created from the pooled out-of-sample predictions."

forest_cart_cal <-
  forest_cart_pred |>
  cal_plot_windowed(class,
                    .pred_Yes,
                    window_size = 0.2,
                    step_size = 0.025) +
  labs(title = "(a)")
forest_cart_roc <-
  forest_cart_pred |>
  roc_curve(class, .pred_Yes) |>
  autoplot() +
  labs(title = "(b)")
forest_cart_vip <-
  cart_fit |>
  extract_fit_engine() |>
  var_imp() |>
  rename(variable = term) |>
  mutate(used = TRUE) |>
  full_join(name_key, by = "variable") |>
  mutate(
    text = ifelse(is.na(text), variable, text),
    text = factor(text),
    text = reorder(text, estimate)
  ) |>
  arrange(desc(estimate))

forest_cart_vip_plot <-
  forest_cart_vip |>
  ggplot(aes(estimate, text)) +
  geom_bar(stat = "identity") +
  labs(x = "Importance", y = NULL, title = "(c)")

(forest_cart_cal + forest_cart_roc) / forest_cart_vip_plot
```

> Panel (c) shows the variable importance scores for the model. As CART splits the data to reduce impurity, it tracks the improvement in the Gini statistic for each predictor. This plot shows the cumulative effect of each predictor on the model. Three predictors have the largest contribution: `r cli::format_inline("{forest_cart_vip$text[1:3]}")`. Almost half of the predictors had little to no effect on the model. 

Reviewer: Should annual precipitation also be included?  Looks like it's not much different than the roughness importance.

> Panel (c) shows the variable importance scores for the model. As CART splits the data to reduce impurity, it tracks the improvement in the Gini statistic for each predictor. This plot shows the cumulative effect of each predictor on the model. Three predictors have the largest contribution: `r cli::format_inline("{forest_cart_vip$text[1:3]}")`. Almost half of the predictors had little to no effect on the model. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Panel (c) shows the variable importance scores for the model. As CART splits the data to reduce impurity, it tracks the improvement in the Gini statistic for each predictor. This plot shows the cumulative effect of each predictor on the model. Three predictors have the largest contribution: `r cli::format_inline("{forest_cart_vip$text[1:3]}")`. This figure does not account for surrogate splits.  Almost half of the predictors had little to no effect on the model. 
```

- information gain ratio (@eq-gain-ratio)
- pessimistic pruning
- multiway splits for qualitative predictors
- small adjustments to the terminal node estimates

Differences between the two are largely due to the addition of a boosting algorithm, which will be described in @sec-cls-modern-boost. One difference between the two versions is that C5.0 includes an option to perform a *global* pruning phase at the end of tree construction. This uses a form of the one-standard-error rule from CART. Pessimistic pruning occurs locally, trimming the tree at a specific node. The global process considers the entire tree at once.

To start, we must compute what our "error budget." This is the number of errors in the tree that is allowable under the one-standard-error rule. To compute this, C5.0 determines the number of errors ($\mathcal{E}$) out of $n$ training set samples. Based on the equation for the Binomial variance, the equation for the standard error of the number of errors is:

$$
\sigma_{\mathcal{E}} = \sqrt{\mathcal{E}\left(1 - \frac{\mathcal{E}}{n}\right)}
$$ {#eq-c5-error-stde}

> If tree has $n=100$ training set points and $\mathcal{E} = 10$ misclassified samples, $\sigma_{\mathcal{E}} = `r sqrt(10 * (1 - (10/100)))`$. This is the number of errors that would be acceptable if we were to choose a tree with one additional standard error or misclassified points. Note that C5.0 uses the resubstitution error rate; unlike CART, it does not perform internal cross-validation to obtain a better statistical estimate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the tree has $n=100$ training set points and $\mathcal{E} = 10$ misclassified samples, $\sigma_{\mathcal{E}} = `r sqrt(10 * (1 - (10/100)))`$. This is the number of errors that would be acceptable if we were to choose a tree with one additional standard error or misclassified points. Note that C5.0 uses the resubstitution error rate; unlike CART, it does not perform internal cross-validation to obtain a better statistical estimate.
```

Once we have our budget of $\sigma_{\mathcal{E}}$ errors, we traverse the tree from top to bottom and search for a subtree whose removal would reduce the error count below the error budget.

Common tuning parameters are:

- Confidence value: Affects the pessimistic pruning, with larger values producing smaller trees.
- $n_{min}$: The number of data points required to enact an additional split within a node. This limits the tree's depth during the growing phase.

```{r}
#| label: forested-c5-stats
#| include: false

forest_c5_mtr <- collect_metrics(forest_c5_res)
forest_c5_rng <- 
  forest_c5_mtr |> 
  dplyr::select(CF, min_n) |>
  map(range)

c5_fit <-
  c5_wflow |>
  finalize_workflow(forest_c5_best) |>
  fit(forested_train)

c5_fit_stat <- c5_fit |> c5_extract()
```

> Of these two, $n_{min}$ tends to have the largest effect. To demonstrate, C5.0 was tuned on the example data using 25 candidates for $n_{min}$ ranging from `r forest_c5_rng[[2]][1]` to `r forest_c5_rng[[2]][2]` and confidence factors from the tree-depth `r round(forest_c5_rng[[1]][1], 3)` to  `r round(forest_c5_rng[[1]][2], 3)`. @fig-forest-c5 shows a plot of the results that is similar to the CART analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of these two, $n_{min}$ tends to have the larger effect. To demonstrate, C5.0 was tuned on the example data using 25 candidates for $n_{min}$ ranging from `r forest_c5_rng[[2]][1]` to `r forest_c5_rng[[2]][2]` and confidence factors from the tree-depth `r round(forest_c5_rng[[1]][1], 3)` to  `r round(forest_c5_rng[[1]][2], 3)`. @fig-forest-c5 shows a plot of the results that is similar to the CART analysis.
```

#|   and no statistically significant predictors.
p_first <-
  cit_first |>
  ggplot(aes(x = statistic, y = label)) +
  geom_point() +
  facet_wrap(~Size, scales = "free_x") +
  labs(x = "Test Statistic", y = NULL) +
  theme_bw()

p_small <-
  cit_small |>
  ggplot(aes(x = statistic, y = label)) +
  geom_point() +
  facet_wrap(~Size, scales = "free_x") +
  labs(x = "Test Statistic", y = NULL) +
  theme_bw()

p_first + p_small
```

What statistical test is used to evaluate the predictors? @StrasserWeber developed mathematical methods for permutation tests of various data types and found a unifying framework. Their method shows that many statistical tests fall within the framework of *linear statistics*, and that their permutation test statistics can have the same distributions. In essence, we can conduct many different types of statistical tests and still make an "apples-to-apples" comparison (either using the test statistics or their p-values). For  classification, @tbl-cit-tests shows different combinations of predictor and  outcome types, their corresponding test descriptions, and any connections to existing statistical methods.

> ::: {#tbl-cit-tests}

Author: I sent an email to Torsten (who made this method) to see if my table below is a good way to summarize these tests or if the entires are not accurate.

  "Outcome: Multiclass"          , "Qualitative"         , "Independence test"            , "Chi-squared"                                            ,
  "Outcome: Multiclass"          , "Ordered Qualitative" , "Multi-way trend test"         , "none"                                                   ,
  "Outcome: Ordered Qualitative" , "Quantitative"        , "Correlation test with scores" , "Spearman-type [@fieller1957tests]"                      ,
  "Outcome: Ordered Qualitative" , "Qualitative"         , "Location test on scores"      , "none"                                                   ,
  "Outcome: Ordered Qualitative" , "Ordered Qualitative" , "Linear-by-linear test"        , "[@Agresti2002vi]"
)

cit_types |>
  group_by(outcome) |>
  gt() |>
  cols_label(
    predictor = "Predictor Type",
    type = "Test Type",
    refs = "Analog"
  ) |>
  fmt_markdown(columns = c(outcome, refs)) |>
  tab_style(
    style = list(cell_fill(color = "gray95"), cell_text(size = "smaller")),
    locations = cells_row_groups()
  )
```

The permutation test types for different outcome and predictor variables, along with their conventional analogs.

:::

> For example, when evaluating numeric predictors such as longitude or annual precipitation, we compare the centers of their distributions, similar to comparing the medians per class. For our county predictor, we use the previously discussed $\chi^2$ statistic. For ordered qualitative columns (e.g., low, medium, high), the categories are converted to rank "scores" and treated as numeric.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, when evaluating numeric predictors such as longitude or annual precipitation, we compare the centers of their distributions, similar to comparing the medians per class. For our county predictor, we use the previously discussed $\chi^2$ statistic. For ordered qualitative columns (e.g., low, medium, high), the categories are converted to rank "scores" and are treated as numeric.
```

The primary benefit of using this framework for data splitting is that the predictor selection process is completely unbiased. Since permutation statistics have the same distribution across data types and characteristics, these factors do not affect their probability of selection for splitting. It also has the benefit of producing trees that are more stable (i.e., lower model variance)  than those from most other models described here.

```{r}
#| label: forested-cit-stats
#| include: false

forest_cit_mtr <- collect_metrics(forest_cit_res)
forest_cit_rng <- 
  forest_cit_mtr |> 
  dplyr::select(min_n, tree_depth, mincriterion) |>
  mutate(mincriterion = 1 - mincriterion) |> 
  map(range)

cit_fit <-
  cit_wflow |>
  finalize_workflow(forest_cit_best) |>
  fit(forested_train)

cit_fit_stat <- cit_fit |> cit_extract()
```

> Using the forestation data, conditional inference trees were tuned over:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the forestation data, conditional inference trees were tuned over the following parameters:
```

> - $n_{min}$: `r forest_cit_rng$min_n[1]` to `r forest_cit_rng$min_n[2]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Minimum node size ($n_{min}$): `r forest_cit_rng$min_n[1]` to `r forest_cit_rng$min_n[2]`.
```

> - tree depth: `r forest_cit_rng$tree_depth[1]` to `r forest_cit_rng$tree_depth[2]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Tree depth: `r forest_cit_rng$tree_depth[1]` to `r forest_cit_rng$tree_depth[2]`.
```

> - The p-value threshold to continue splitting: `r forest_cit_rng$mincriterion[1]` to `r forest_cit_rng$mincriterion[2]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- P-value threshold to continue splitting: `r forest_cit_rng$mincriterion[1]` to `r forest_cit_rng$mincriterion[2]`.
```

> - Whether to use a Bonferroni p-value correction or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Bonferroni p-value correction:  enabled or disabled.
```

  full_join(
    forest_cit_res |> 
      collect_metrics(type = "wide") |> 
      select(.config, testtype, brier_class, roc_auc),
    by = ".config"
  ) |> 
  bind_rows(
    forest_cit_res |> 
      collect_metrics(type = "wide") |> 
      rename(
        `Tree Depth` = tree_depth,
        `Minimal Node Size` = min_n,
        `p-value Threshold` = mincriterion
      ) |> 
      mutate(
        `p-value Threshold` = 1 - `p-value Threshold`
      ) |>
      pivot_longer(
        c(`Tree Depth`, `Minimal Node Size`, `p-value Threshold`),
        names_to = "parameter",
        values_to = "value"
      ) 
  ) |> 
  mutate(
    parameter = factor(parameter, levels = cit_lvls),
    Bonferroni = ifelse(testtype == "Bonferroni", "yes", "no")
  ) |> 
  ggplot(aes(value, brier_class, col = Bonferroni, pch = Bonferroni)) + 
  geom_point(alpha = 0.65, cex = 2) + 
  facet_wrap(~ parameter, scales = "free_x", nrow = 1) +
  labs(y = "Brier Score", x = NULL) + 
  theme(legend.position = "top")
```

The conditional inference tree has equivalent performance to the previous trees but with reduced complexity and uses fewer predictors.

### Globally Estimated Trees {#sec-cls-tree-global}

> So far, we've used greedy methods for constructing trees. At each stage in splitting, the models make the *locally* optimal decisions and do not reevaluate any previous splits to ensure that the overall model is optimal. Although @murthy1995decision found that greedy optimization performed well in their experiments for finding optimal trees, it is worth considering alternatives.\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far, we've used greedy methods to construct trees. At each split, these models make *locally* optimal decisions without reconsidering any previous splits to ensure global optimality. Although @murthy1995decision found that greedy optimization performed well in their experiments, it is worth considering alternatives.\
```

There are also global methods for tree construction.  One will be discussed in the next chapter (@sec-cls-bart) that uses Bayesian estimation. Another approach is to use evolutionary optimization methods, such as genetic algorithms, to simultaneously configure all of the splits in the tree.

> How do we encode the tree in a manner that such optimization tools can be used? One approach is to specify the largest size tree that we are interested in as a placeholder. Specifying a maximum depth $d_{max}$ for binary splits indicates that there will be, at most, $2^{d_{max}}-1$, internal nodes. A vector-based structure to contain the tree details (a.k.a. the chromosome in GAs) would bind together for the split variable index, the split values, and the rule type (i.e., $\le$, $>$, $=$, or $\in$).

Reviewer: What do you mean by internal nodes?  I believe that $2^{d{max}}-1$ is the total nodes.  By internal, do you mean total nodes?

> How do we encode the tree in a manner that such optimization tools can be used? One approach is to specify the largest size tree that we are interested in as a placeholder. Specifying a maximum depth $d_{max}$ for binary splits indicates that there will be, at most, $2^{d_{max}}-1$, internal nodes. A vector-based structure to contain the tree details (a.k.a. the chromosome in GAs) would bind together for the split variable index, the split values, and the rule type (i.e., $\le$, $>$, $=$, or $\in$).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How do we encode the tree in a manner that such optimization tools can be used? One approach is to specify the largest size tree that we are interested in as a placeholder. Specifying a maximum depth $d_{max}$ for binary splits indicates that there will be, at most, $2^{d_{max}}-1$, terminal nodes. A vector-based structure to contain the tree details (a.k.a. the chromosome in GAs) would bind together for the split variable index, the split values, and the rule type (i.e., $\le$, $>$, $=$, or $\in$).
```

A basic genetic algorithm can be used to generate new trees via reproduction (e.g., crossover, mutation). However, it is very possible that generic genetic operations can result in nonsensical or infeasible tree structures.

Alternatively, @chipman1998bayesian describe sets of operations to modify tree structures. @fig-tree-mutation shows examples of how a binary tree with two splits and three terminal nodes might be refactored. The first is *growth*, in which a terminal node is picked at random, and a new split is created. *Pruning*  removes a randomly chosen split. We can also *change* a randomly chosen split by modifying the split variable and/or its split value. Finally, it might be  helpful during the search process to *swap* adjacent nodes in a tree.

```{r}
#| label: fig-tree-mutation
#| echo: false
#| out-width: 100%
#| fig-width: 4
#| fig-height: 5
#| fig-cap: "Methods of mutating trees: growing, pruning, mutating, and swapping nodes. Orange nodes represent the portions of the tree affected by the changes."
knitr::include_graphics("../premade/tree_operations_swap.svg")
```

> For example, @JSSv061i01 describes a specific genetic algorithm called *evtree* using these operators^[However, it does not use the swapping operation and considers switching the split predictors and split values separate operations.]  to evolve a tree where the objective/fitness function is a penalized misclassification cost metric. The penalty is

Author: This section is mostly setup for the BART section later. I might enable the evtree model in tidymodels and add some model tuning here but that might be a bit much. It's already a long chapter.

Regarding the logistic regression models, the training process might use an abbreviated number of optimization rounds to estimate the logistic model -- perhaps a single step of iteratively reweighed least squares. Alternatively, following  @truong2009fast, a regularized logistic regression model could be used to estimate a sparse linear combination. @jaeger2022aorsf enables the specification of the glmnet mixing parameter $\alpha$ in @eq-glmnet-penalty. To determine the amount of regularization, the penalty is chosen based on an upper limit on the glmnet model's degrees of freedom for each penalty value. By default, the degrees of freedom are set to $\lceil \sqrt{p} \rceil$ where $p$ is the number of parameters used in the linear combination. 

Also, recall that logistic regression models are specific to classes with two possible values. For $C > 2$ outcome classes, the model creates a set of one-against-all models. It identified the outcome class that is determined to be most "splittable" (i.e., has sufficient events and non-events). Based on this, it fits a logistic regression for the favored class versus the others.

> To demonstrate using the forestation data, the model was tuned over $n_{min}$ and also by the logistic regression method. A regular grid was used, combining 50 values of $n_{min}$ with four model configurations: standard logistic regression and glmnet models with $\alpha \in \{0.0, 0.5, 1.0\}$.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To demonstrate using the forestation data, the model was tuned over $n_{min}$ and also by the logistic regression method. A regular grid was used, combining 50 values of $n_{min}$ with four model configurations: standard logistic regression and glmnet models with $\alpha \in \{0.0, 0.5, 1.0\}$^[Recall the $\alpha values of 0.0, 0.5, and 1.0 correspond to the ridge regression, glmnet, and LASSO models].  
```

  ) |> 
  full_join(
    obl_set_mtr |> 
      select(wflow_id, .config, brier_class), 
    by = c(".config", "wflow_id")
  ) |> 
  bind_rows(
    obl_set_mtr |> 
      select(wflow_id, .config, brier_class, value = min_n) |> 
      mutate(parameter = "Minimal Node Size")
  ) |>
  filter(parameter != "# Active Predictors") |> 
  mutate(
    Method = gsub("basic_", "", wflow_id),
    Method = factor(Method, levels = c("Unpenalized", "Ridge", "glmnet", "Lasso")),
    parameter = factor(parameter, levels = c("Minimal Node Size", "# Terminal Nodes"))) |> 
  ggplot(aes(value, brier_class, col = Method)) + 
  geom_point(alpha = 1 / 4) + 
  geom_smooth(se = FALSE, span = 0.6) +
  facet_wrap(~ parameter, scale = "free_x") + 
  theme(legend.position = "top") +
  labs(y = "Brier Score", x = NULL) +
  scale_color_brewer(palette = "Set2")
```

The performance metrics for the tree using $n_{min}$ = `r forest_obl_best$min_n` samples and the ridge penalty are shown in @tbl-tree-statistics; the Brier and ROC metric values are slightly worse than the trees using rectangular splits.

We'll discuss ensembles of oblique trees in the next chapter. 

## Rule-Based Models {#sec-cls-rules}

> Rule-based models can be created in different ways. The most frequently used strategy is to start with a decision tree and use the paths to the terminal nodes as an initial set of rules.  Examples of this approach are REF and REF. C4.5 was one of the first methods to do this. We'll describe what C5.0 does, but it is mostly the same as its predecessors. Also, this section focuses on a rule set derived from a single tree. The next chapter describes how rule set ensembles are created. 

Reviewer: Just wanted to point out the two missing REF's.

For example, consider this rule: 

::: {style="text-align: center;"}

<tt>max vapor < 1247.5 & roughness < 12.5 & max annual temp < 15.965</tt>

:::

The training set points that are "active" under this rule are predominantly forested, so the class prediction suggested by this rule is "forested". 

This baseline rule has a resubstitution accuracy of `r iter_1_base`%, using the correction defined in @sec-tree-estimates, which it calls the "confidence value". What happens when we remove each of the conditions in the rule but keep the same predicted value? 

- <tt>max vapor < 1247.5</tt> removed: `r iter_1_m_1`% accuracy
- <tt>roughness < 12.5</tt> removed:  `r iter_1_m_2`% accuracy
- <tt>max annual temp < 15.965</tt> removed:  `r iter_1_m_3`% accuracy

> Removing the roughness term increases the rule's performance, so we eliminate it. The new baseline accuracy is `r iter_1_m_2`% . 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Removing the roughness term improves the rule's performance, so we exclude it from the final model. The new baseline accuracy is `r iter_1_m_2`% . 
```

  summarize(
    value = mean(.estimate), 
    .by = c(.metric, .config)
  ) |>
  rename(parameter = .metric) |> 
  full_join(
    forest_c5rules_res |> 
      collect_metrics(type = "wide") |> 
      select(.config, brier_class, roc_auc),
    by = ".config"
  ) |> 
  bind_rows(
    forest_c5rules_res |> 
      collect_metrics(type = "wide") |> 
      mutate(
        CF = log10(CF)
      )  |> 
      rename(
        `Confidence Factor log` = CF,
        `Minimal Node Size` = min_n
      ) |> 
      pivot_longer(
        c(`Confidence Factor log`, `Minimal Node Size`),
        names_to = "parameter",
        values_to = "value"
      ) 
  ) |> 
  mutate(parameter = factor(parameter, levels = c5rules_lvls)) |> 
  ggplot(aes(value, brier_class)) + 
  geom_point(alpha = 2 / 4, cex = 2) + 
  facet_wrap(~ parameter, scales = "free_x", nrow = 1) +
  labs(y = "Brier Score", x = NULL)  
```

Referring back to @tbl-tree-statistics, we see that this model, out of all of the methods discussed in this chapter, had the worst Brier score and area under the ROC curve. However, it's till better than the naive Bayes model. 

## The Instability of Trees {#sec-cls-tree-unstable}

> ## From Trees to Rules {#sec-cls-rules}

Author: I didn't realize that this is a chapter name from Quinlan's book so I used a different title

> However, some tree-based models are less unstable. Recall that conditional inference trees use a statistical test using all of the current training set data in the node to pick the predictor to split. After this, the standard search within that predictor is used (and is unstable). This decoupling enables these methods to have more reliable models. Also, the previously described oblique tree method in @jaeger2022aorsf fits a logistic regression model to obtain its linear predictor, which it uses as a split. This is a more complex but much more stable process than that used by CART or C5.0 and is even more reliable when a regularized model is used. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, some tree-based models are less unstable. Recall that conditional inference trees use a statistical test using all of the current training set data in the node to pick the predictor to split. After this, the standard search within that predictor is used (and is unstable). This decoupling enables these methods to have more reliable models. Also, the previously described oblique tree method in @jaeger2022aorsf fits a logistic regression model to obtain its linear predictor, which it uses as a split. Conditional inference trees employ a more complex but substantially more stable process than CART or C5.0, with even greater reliability when regularization is applied. 
```
